O Lord, open our hearts and our minds by the power of your Holy Spirit.
We may hear your word with joy and gladness.
Amen.
So we're gonna be focusing on verses 13 to 27 of this chapter, but of course, we need to give ourselves a little bit of context for what's going on before that.
So our chapter for this week, Exodus 18 comes to us immediately after our text from last week where the Israelites defeated the Amalekites.
And where Moses had the great and awesome privilege of sorts, of raising his staff all day long with the help of Aaron and her.
So the people of Israel could win that battle.
After that battle takes place, Exodus 18 opens, tells us that Moses' father-in-law, Jethro, the Midianite priest, has come with Moses' wife and children to where the Israelites were camped out in the wilderness.
Jethro had heard of the wonders that God had performed for his people as they escaped from Egypt.
And as he visits and dines with Moses, Moses tells him about everything else that God has been doing for the people as they've been journeying through the wilderness thus far.
Now, Jethro then gives praise to God.
He recognizes the Lord's place as the most powerful God in existence.
He offers sacrifices and burnt offerings to the Lord before eating bread together with Moses and the elders of the people of Israel in God's presence.
So that's where we are picking up our text for today.
Exodus 18 starting at verse 13.
Hear these words.
The next day Moses took his seat to serve his judge for the people and they stood around him from morning till evening.
When his father-in-law saw all that Moses was doing for the people, he said, what is this that you were doing for the people?
Why do you alone sit as judge?
Well, all these people stand around you from morning to evening.
Moses answered him, because the people come to me to seek God's will.
Whenever they have a dispute, it is brought to me and I decide between parties and inform them of God's decrees and instructions.
Moses's father-in-law replied, what you are doing is not good.
You and these people who come to you will only wear yourselves out
The work is too heavy for you.
You cannot handle it alone.
Listen now to me and I will give you some advice and may God be with you.
You must be the people's representative before God and bring their disputes to him.
Teach them his decrees and instructions.
Show them the way that they are to live and how they are to behave.
But select capable men from all the people, men who fear God.
Trustworthy men who hate dishonest gain.
And appoint them as officials over thousands and hundreds and fifties and tens.
Have them serve as judges for the people at all times, but have them bring every difficult case to you.
The simple case is they can decide themselves.
That will make your load lighter because they will share it with you.
If you do this in God so commands, you will be able to stand the strain and all these people will go home satisfied.
Moses listened to his father-in-law and did everything he said.
He chose capable men from all Israel, made them leaders of the people, officials over thousands, hundreds, fifties and tens,
They served as judges for the people at all times.
The difficult cases they brought to Moses, but the simple ones they decided themselves.
Then Moses sent his father-in-law on his way, and Jethro returned to his own country.
This is the word of the Lord, thanks be to God.
A lot of what we have been considering so far in this sermon series is, as I said, God's people learning to trust in God.
trusting in God as their deliverer, as their provider, learning what it means to be God's people and to follow after Him.
So last week, and again, this week, we're getting that a little bit more through Moses' experiences.
Last week, we saw how God through Moses showed His people that they need to depend on each other, as well as depend on God's providence and sustaining power in their lives.
Now, this week, we once more get a glimpse at Moses' learning to be a better leader
and setting a better example for the people under his charge, learning to trust in God and in God's providence.
From the outset, I am quite glad that we are looking at this story in Exodus because I think it's a good reminder for us.
By that, I mean it's good for us to look at stories of failure and growth.
in the lives of biblical figures and individuals who we hold up in of high esteem and regard as people who followed after God very closely.
It's important for us to be able to look at their shortcomings so that we may see ourselves in them, empathize with them, and be encouraged as we seek to overcome our own failures and shortcomings.
Moses is not a perfect leader.
You know, the beginning of the book of Exodus when he's first introduced tells us of all of his trials and his tribulations, his doubts, his misgivings, his hesitancy to lead God's people out of Egypt with his imposter syndrome on full display.
I think sometimes we can fall into the idea that Moses threw his experience of leading the people out of Egypt through the Red Sea, through the wilderness.
It was just a good leader from then on.
He was not though.
This story is one example that shows us Moses' growth as a follower of God and as a leader of God's people.
Yes, growth wasn't over once they were on the other side of the Red Sea.
No, Moses is still learning what it means to lead God's people, to be in community with them.
He, fortunately, is human, like you or I, and very much like us, he needs
Now, Jethro sees that Moses is spending most of his waking hours sitting before the people and judging their disputes and their problems, telling them God's will for how they ought to live, how they should settle their disputes.
Jethro sees that Moses is either experiencing or is dangerously close to experiencing a whole mess of burnout.
Now, Exodus chapter 12 tells us that when the Israelites left Egypt, there were 600,000 some
men of military fighting age.
And that's not including the women, that's not including the children, that's not including the men who are not of military fighting age or capability, that's not including the untold number of Egyptians who upon seeing the plagues turned their hearts towards God and came up out of Egypt along with the Israelites.
So conservatively, let's say there's about a million people in this camp, in the wilderness, that Moses is the soul
judge and arbiter for.
If you think the American justice system is slow, imagine how long it would take to stand in line day after day, slowly inching closer to Moses to let him settle your dispute.
I wonder how many of the disputes among the people of Israel were just settled in line because the two parties just got sick of waiting in line and just hashed it out right then and there so that they could go home.
Jethro sees this inefficiency and this impending catastrophic burnout as clear as day and he takes action.
He has most why on earth he alone is sitting and doing this every single day from morning to evening.
Ruth Haley Barton in her book, Strengthening the Soul of Your Leadership.
It's a book that the Consistory read last year for our devotionals together.
She suggests that she hears a little bit of
pride of indispensability in Moses' response.
Moses answers, Jethro, he says that he's doing this.
He alone is doing this because the people come to me to seek God's will.
Obviously, I have to tell them what God's will is they come to me.
Whenever they have a dispute, it's brought to me and I decide between the parties and form them with God's will and decrees and instructions.
You ever catch yourself in a similar situation?
You're doing something on your own because if you don't do it, who will?
This is what Barton is getting at by saying Moses perhaps feels indispensable.
He is the appointed leader of the people after all, and the people are looking to him for wisdom, advice, and the word of God.
So of course, he needs to shoulder this burden by himself.
I also wonder if Moses is a bit
scared of what might happen if he lets others help him, if he delegates some of his responsibility elsewhere.
I know that I have that inclination often.
I like to be in control of what's going on.
My default posture is one of stepping into perceived power vacuums and taking charge.
And if I've been placed in charge of something, that inclination is then to be uneasy.
when relinquishing some of my control over whatever it is, to let others help me, no matter how burnt out I might be, because what if they do things differently than me?
What if they mess up and their mistakes come back to reflect on me badly as a leader?
What if?
I think that's part of the challenge for Moses in this passage.
He's trying to do all these things by himself because he thinks he has to.
And I think he's just stuck in this vicious loop, bringing him ever closer and closer and closer to crashing out and harming those he's supposed to be leading in the process.
Now, are we not often the same?
Are we taking on too much in our work, in our social lives, in our roles in the church, trying to do things all on our own?
I know that that's me.
I was typing out this paragraph on Thursday afternoon and I stopped and I said, oh, okay, this is one of those weeks where God is really speaking to me as much as he is speaking through me to you.
I am excellent at doing a lot of things or so I may think.
As I said, I find pride, I find myself taking pride in my perceived in dispensability.
And I, like Moses, sometimes need someone to come to me and shake me out of my delusions.
Do you hear yourself in that as well?
You know, we have this myth of this rugged individualism, this person, this leader going far out ahead of the pack, doing everything themselves.
And there's this power, prestige and admiration that comes from being in that position.
Oh, it's so tempting.
The more that we live and chase after into that delusion of success, the more humbling it is when we inevitably hit our limit, recognize that we can't go alone, turn around and look at how far we've ostracized ourselves in our pursuit of success.
We realize that we need people to help us, that we need to let go of the firm grip of control that we have.
We don't just do this with our work lives, though.
I think that's kind of the easy example there.
There are untold numbers of business leadership and church leadership books about 15 easy ways to avoid burnout, the power of doing things as a team.
So we need reminders of that, but I think that's floating around in the conversation as it were.
I think the deeper thing that we need to consider
is to look at our lives of faith.
Just as we have this mythical idea of this rugged individualism when it comes to our business or our political leadership, I think we also have that in the church.
So much emphasis in broad evangelical spaces over the past several decades has been placed on our own singular personal relationship with Jesus Christ, that we have siloed ourselves off.
on our own.
There is this stereotype and pressure.
We've got to have a robust personal prayer life.
We need to have a good devotional life to make sure that we're doing all these other spiritual practices to build up our individual life with Christ.
It's all about me and Jesus.
That is good.
That is certainly good.
Do not get me wrong.
That is an admirable thing to be striving after.
But I think we lose the forest for the trees.
We lose our sense of community.
I think every single church that I have worked at at some point or another, someone has said that they don't know other people in the church outside of the people who they talk to after church, the five or so people that are on the table with them, the two friends that they have coffee with in the Narthex afterwards.
In our pursuit of a healthy personal relationship with Christ, we have forgotten to maintain our relationships within the church, our communal relationship with Christ.
But that's not just from our emphasis on a personal, salvific relationship with Christ.
There are exterior pressures that pull and push us away from the community of God's people.
Our culture has become less religious, more secularized, more pluralistic over the past few decades.
And there are some amazing opportunities for us in that as the church.
But one of the negative aspects to that is that Sunday is far less sacred of a day, and that the church as an institution has far less cultural pull.
And if Sunday is just another day of the weekend,
Without any special importance, then it's fair game for scheduling activities, competitions, other things that pull us away from our community.
It's a great hot take from the pastor, right?
People need to be in church more often.
I am not by saying that.
I am not trying to shame or pass judgment on anyone for investing their weekends in their kids' extracurriculars or sports or what have you.
But I want us to recognize how we are pulled in a million directions away from our community.
That's difficult to live into our community when we're missing each other week to week because you've got something this week.
I'm out next week.
We'll see each other at Easter maybe, okay?
But it's not even just that.
Especially in a congregation like ours where we are blessed.
It is a blessing to have people from all over the political spectrum
It can be very easy to give into the temptation to listen to the screaming voices of our political leaders that those people who don't vote like you are the enemy, that they're not like you.
You can't connect with them.
They're not a real Christian because they don't value X, Y, and Z in the same way that you do.
It's a lot harder to connect to people
if you view them through a lens of partisan division rather than viewing them through the lens of being a fellow image-bearer and child of God.
So we're in danger of losing our community and burning out from trying to do our life of faith on our own because we have this emphasis on our singular experiences because of these external pressures pulling us away and our politics pulling us down.
Fear of others also plays a part here as well.
A lot of us have been hurt by the church, by the leaders of churches that we've been to at the past.
Perhaps we've even been told by our brothers and sisters in Christ that because of how we vote, we're bad Christians.
That's a huge reason why people today will leave a church and never seek it out again.
They don't want to be hurt again.
quite understandably, they don't want the messiness of dealing with other people's fallen nature, especially in regards to their faith in Christ.
And so we sit in our little silos of loneliness, in our disconnected reality of faith, getting more tired and lonely and burnt out.
We slowly start to spiral in that we can't get ourselves out of it.
What we need more often than not is someone to smack us out of that spiral.
It's what Jethro does here for Moses.
He says, what you are doing is not good.
You and these people who come to you, you're only gonna wear yourselves out.
The work is too heavy for you.
You cannot ain't a little alone.
One of the commentators that I was reading this week posited the question of why Moses needed Jethro to say this to him.
Why didn't God just tell Moses to divide the labor?
I know why, because Moses is like me.
He can't hear
Those words from someone who's really close to him.
He can't act on that if he hears those words from someone who's close to him.
He needs to hear those words from someone he perceives to be more objective.
I guarantee that Larissa has a massive smirk on her face right now.
Maybe some of your spouses, your siblings, or your friends may as well get a couple elbows on the side, perhaps some of us.
How many times have you received advice from someone that you hold an objectively high regard only for your significant other to say, that's what I told you to do last week?
I digress.
Jeff Rowe, I imagine, puts a hand on Moses's shoulder, shakes his head with a sage fatherly disappointment, and tells Moses to cut it out.
Well, yes, he's the leader of the people.
He needs to intercede.
He needs to be God's representative.
He doesn't need to handle everything by himself.
Teach all of the people, God's decrees and instructions.
Show them the way that they are to live and how they are to behave.
But please, for the love of your sanity and these people's sanity, but select capable men.
from the people, men who fear God, men who are trustworthy, who hate dishonest gain, and appoint them as officials over thousands and hundreds and fifties and tens, have them serve as judges for the people at all times, but have them bring every difficult case to you.
The simple case is they can decide on themselves.
That will make your load lighter because they will share it with you.
If you do this and God so commands, you will be able to stand the strain, and all these people will go home satisfied.
I've said it time and time again.
This sermon series is about God's people learning to trust in God.
To learn what it means to be God's people.
Moses is learning to trust in God as his provider.
God has provided Jethro at the right time to come and shake him out of his dangerous spiraling.
God provides leaders from among the people to be these judges of thousands and hundreds and fifties and tens so that Moses doesn't have to shoulder all this himself.
Now there are other leaders in the community who can help him tell people what God's decrees are, what his will for their lives is.
As we'll see next week, God will soon provide an even better avenue for Moses to be able to tell the people God's decrees, his law.
God's law is a gift of providence for his people.
This chapter is not just also showing us how Moses is learning to be a better leader than to rely on his community.
But this chapter is also here to show the people's continuing journey of knowing God.
Moses tells Jethro that all these people come to him to seek God's will.
They don't know what God's will is because they haven't been told.
They don't have the law.
They don't have anything written down.
They just have whatever Moses tells them.
Fortunately for them,
Jethro comes, tells Moses to share that load, so now the people will have these other judges who help Moses.
And while that solution is okay, the people blessedly are about to receive a more direct awareness of what God desires and requires of them in the giving of the law.
That is the story of God's people, not just these specific Israelites, but all of us.
God has always been at work in the world and in the lives of his people to bring them closer to him.
and to know Him more and more.
God has provided for Moses and for the Israelites by sending Jethro to encourage this better leadership structure and this division of labor.
God will give His people the law that they may further know Him and how to live in communion with one another.
And God has provided for us with something even better than the law, though.
The prophet Jeremiah foretells of a new covenant that God will make with His people.
The days are coming, declares the Lord.
When I will make a new covenant with a house of Israel and with a house of Judah that will not be like the covenant I made with her ancestors when I took them by the hand to lead them out of Egypt because they broke my covenant, though I was a husband to them declares the Lord.
This is the new covenant I will make with the house of Israel after that time declares the Lord.
I will put my law in their hearts.
I will put their law in their hearts.
I will be their God, they will be my people, no longer will they teach their neighbors saying to one another, no the Lord, because all of them will know me.
From the least of them to the greatest declares, Lord, for I will forgive their wickedness and remember their sins no more.
The prophet Ezekiel later speaks of the same.
Ezekiel says, prophesize the Lord, I will give you a new heart, put a new spirit within you.
I will remove from you your heart of stone and give you a heart of flesh.
And I will put my spirit in you and move you to follow my decrees and to be careful to keep my ways.
God will write his law on the hearts of his people.
He will make a new covenant with them and give them his spirit.
Jesus in instituting the sacrament of communion after the supper, he raises the cup.
He says, this cup is the new covenant in my blood, which is given for you.
Jesus Himself is this new covenant.
The Holy Spirit who came upon all the believers at Pentecost who dwells within the hearts of every believer is that Spirit of God that Ezekiel prophesied of.
God has provided for us to know Him all the more.
God has also provided us with the communion of saints.
God has always provided for us in our loneliness and in our isolation.
The first thing, the first thing in the Bible that God says is not good after creation.
And it was good, it was good, it was good, it was good, it was good.
Humanity was very good.
The first thing that God said is not good is Adam's loneliness.
It's not good for man to be alone.
We are communal and embodied beings.
It is not good for us to be alone.
God has always provided
His people with community.
He has provided us with a community of believers in which we can live out our faith and know God together.
We are joined together by the power of our faith in God as the Belgian Confession tells us.
We are united in one spirit, in heart and in will.
But we are also still people.
Community is always messy.
It is difficult to trust and lean on others, knowing that in some way at some point they will fail you, that you will fail them.
Moses didn't just need to appoint people as judges, but he needed to trust in them that they could carry out the responsibilities delegated to them.
Moses had to let his tight grasp loosen and allow for other flawed people to help him.
And so too, we need to lean into the hardship of living in community because the fruit that it bears is better than anything.
We need to develop relationships within the church that allow our brothers and sisters in Christ to be the Jethroes to our Moseses.
Just earlier this week, Pastor Michael was a bit of a Jethro for me, giving me the explicit words that I needed, that I needed to loosen my grip
on some of the aspects of my work, so that I wouldn't be doing too much to the detriment of that work.
We were not made as beings who can do everything.
We have limits, we have always had limits, but it's in those limitations that we can live into the community that God has provided for us.
It's in the limits of our knowledge that we can seek the wisdom of others.
The more we recognize our limits,
the more we can see God and His limitless grace and love.
That's really the point of all of this at the end of the day.
In our reliance on each other, we point to God.
In our choosing difficult community over a seemingly easier isolation, we show forgiveness.
We show grace.
In our choosing to ignore voices that claim that we should be divided,
against our brothers and sisters in Christ, we show the unity we share in the spirit as Christ's body.
As we live into this covenant community of broken people saved by grace, we shine the light of God into this darkened world.
We are called to be tied together in spirit and in heart because that fellowship of believers points us and the world to God.
The elementary students who were at our glow party a couple of days ago also know this.
They were taught this as part of this glow party.
Jesus tells us in the Sermon on the Mount in Matthew chapter five, 13 to 16, Jesus says, you are the salt of the earth.
But if the salt loses its saltiness, how can it be made salty again?
And it's no longer good for anything except to be thrown out and trampled underfoot.
You are the light of the world.
A city on a hill cannot be hidden.
Neither do people put a lamp, let lamp and put it under a bowl.
Instead, they put it on its stand and it gives light to everyone in the house.
You know, in the same way, let your light shine before others that they may see your good deeds and glorify your Father in heaven.
God provides for us in our loneliness and in our isolation.
He always has.
God has given us the Holy Spirit that we may know God's will for our lives.
God has given us our brothers and sisters in Christ who can help us discern where God is leading us, all for the glory of God to be brought into the world.
That is our call as a community of Christ's followers.
Two in the words that we will shortly sing in our song of response to bind our hearts in love to share each other's woes to bear our mutual burdens, to rejoice with those who rejoice and mourn with those who mourn.
Because our church community is how we live out our salvation together.
to point towards God.
This fellowship of kindred minds, as the hymn says, is like to that above.
We are united in one body, just as God, the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit is united, is one God in three persons.
We are God's image-bearers, and we bear his likeness and light to the world.
So let us seek and strive to know God all the more, to know each other more,
and to show each other and others God's love and grace all the more.
Amen.
Now my friends as we respond to this message, we have our little yellow response slips that you can write something down on if you want to.
As we reflect on this where God is maybe calling us to respond, few questions perhaps to just percolate on.
Where do I feel
isolated in my life of faith.
We're just in life in general.
Where is God in that isolation?
Where is God perhaps pulled me out of that isolation before?
Do I maybe need to seek the Spirit's leading in that isolation?
Do I need to pray for God to give me a proverbial death row to get me out of my stupor?
How can I be that person for someone else?
Maybe God is calling me to speak into someone's life.
Maybe I need to pray for God to empower me to reach out to somebody who needs my community and my encouragement.
How is God calling us to live into this community?